.TH PSAM 1 "October 2025" "psam 0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
psam \- Position-Specific Association Memory command line utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B psam
\fICOMMAND\fR [options]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B psam
utility provides a thin command line wrapper over the libpsam C API. It
allows you to train models from text files, inspect statistics, generate
continuations, and manipulate composite manifests without writing any
code. All commands emit JSON by default; pass
.B --pretty
for human readable formatting or
.B --quiet
for terse streaming output where supported.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B build
Train a PSAM model from text input.
.TP
.B compose
Create or update a .psamc composite manifest with integrity checking.
.TP
.B predict
Compute top predictions for a given context.
.TP
.B generate
Sample a continuation using top-k/top-p decoding.
.TP
.B explain
Show the contributing context terms for a candidate token.
.TP
.B analyze
Report core model statistics.
.TP
.B inspect
Print header metadata for .psam or .psamc files.
.TP
.B tokenize
Convert text to token IDs using a vocabulary TSV.
.TP
.B ids
Convert token IDs back to text using a vocabulary TSV.

.SH OPTIONS
Each subcommand has its own options; run
.B psam COMMAND --help
for details. Common parameters include:
.TP
.B --model PATH
Path to a .psam model file (required by most commands).
.TP
.B --context STRING
Raw text used as context. Aligned composites saved with a unified vocabulary will
auto-load it; standalone .psam models still require --vocab.
.TP
.B --ctx-ids LIST
Comma separated token IDs used as context.
.TP
.B --top_k N
Number of predictions to consider.
.TP
.B --top_p FLOAT
Nucleus sampling threshold for generate.
.TP
.B --temperature FLOAT
Softmax temperature for sampling (default: 1.0, range 0.1-2.0 with zscore).
.TP
.B --logit-transform MODE
Logit preprocessing mode: zscore (default), raw, legacy, or calibrated.
Z-score normalization makes temperature work intuitively in 0.1-2.0 range.
.TP
.B --prompt STRING
Alias for --context. For aligned composites the unified vocab is detected automatically;
otherwise pair it with --vocab or use --ctx-ids.
.TP
.B --seed N
Deterministic random seed for generate.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid arguments.
.TP
.B 3
Missing input files.
.TP
.B 4
Checksum or integrity failure.
.TP
.B 5
Internal error.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Train a model from text
.PP
.nf
psam build --input data.txt \\
           --out model.psam \\
           --vocab-out vocab.tsv
.fi
.SS Train with shared vocabulary
.PP
Train multiple models with the same vocabulary for compositing:
.PP
.nf
# Step 1: Build unified vocabulary
psam build --input all_texts.txt \\
           --out temp.psam \\
           --vocab-out unified.tsv

# Step 2: Train each text with shared vocabulary
psam build --input text1.txt \\
           --vocab-in unified.tsv \\
           --out model1.psam

psam build --input text2.txt \\
           --vocab-in unified.tsv \\
           --out model2.psam

# Step 3: Create composite (vocabularies match)
psam compose --out combined.psamc \\
             --layer model1.psam \\
             --layer model2.psam
.fi
.SS Generate a continuation
.PP
.nf
psam generate --model model.psam \\
              --prompt "the cat" --vocab vocab.tsv \\
              --count 32 --temperature 0.8 --top_p 0.95
.fi
.PP
Aligned composites with an embedded unified vocabulary no longer need the extra flag:
.PP
.nf
psam generate --model tragedies_v1.psamc \\
              --prompt "When shall we three meet again" \\
              --count 40 --top_k 16
.fi
.SS Generate with deterministic sampling
.PP
.nf
psam generate --model model.psam \\
              --prompt "To be or not to be" \\
              --vocab vocab.tsv \\
              --count 20 \\
              --temperature 0.3 \\
              --logit-transform zscore \\
              --seed 42
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.UR https://github.com/Foundation42/libpsam
.B libpsam documentation
.UE
.br
.B scripts/shakespeare_harness.py
 (repository helper for tragedy/comedy regression composites)
